---
date: 2015-03-20
round: Round 12
title: A Demotivation Case of Unsupportive Environment
author: Kai Yang
permalink: /2015/03/kai-yang-motivation/
tags:
  - Motivation
  - Environment
---

I would say I do have encountered numerous nonqualified instructors,
with respect to higher standard of teaching. The most recent one was
in a university extension class with unsupported environment.

To refresh my knowledge in statistical inference, I registered in a
university extension class, most of whose teachers and students are
industry practitioners. During the course, we were required to do
eight homework assignments. Believe it or not, I had received neither
grade nor feedback on any of the eight. The only thing I received was
the automatic message from the University server about the on-time
submissions. In the last lecture of course, there was finally a
handout of the so-called solution sheets and a short period of
homework reviews. At that time, I believed most classmates already
lost memory on details. One can imagine what happened. The instructor
basically spoke to himself.

To be worse, the instructor was often evasive to students'
questions. He was a program manager in a private company. Despite
having a PhD in math from an Ivy League university, I felt he behaved
more like a politician. He usually gave answers as vague as possible
to tougher questions. The most typical response is "It depends",
without adequate elaborations. When being pushed further, he would
start to divert.

What could have been done differently? The root cause could be that
the instructor lacked of enthusiasm in teaching. He needs to change
his mentality from deal making in corporate world to motivating people
in classroom. He should have communicated more with students. The only
message broadcast from him was the syllabus when the course was
already in its fourth week. His indifference to teaching as an
instructor might eventually damage his reputation.
