---
date: 2015-03-23
round: Round 12
title: Handwriting
author: Owen Stephens
permalink: /2015/03/owen-stephens-motivation/
tags:
  - Motiviation
---

My handwriting was, and is, messy and hard to read. When I was between
11 and 13 years old I had a history teacher who believed students'
work should be neat and tidy. The result of this was that I was
constantly marked down in history due to my handwriting.

While this history teacher wasn't the only one to comment on my
handwriting (and indeed, the school put me into a special
'handwriting' class at lunchtimes to try to improve my writing) he was
the only one (that I remember) who continually marked me down on the
basis of my writing. I definitely felt at the time that the quality of
the content of my work didn't matter to him as much as a the quality
of the presentation - and I felt this was stupid.

In the UK at the time generally one dropped down to studying 9
subjects at the age of 14 and although I loved history timetabling
issues with other subjects I wanted to study meant I ended up dropping
history. I wouldn't attribute this directly to the teacher's attitude
to my work, but I think it must have contributed to me prioritising
other subjects when I was faced with dropping some of my classes.

Could anything have been done to fix this after the fact? In general
terms there was a fix to avoid my messy handwriting being a factor in
my work and in comments on my work - I was lucky enough to get a home
computer around this time (a [BBC Model B with 32K of RAM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BBC_Micro)!
This was 1986 so it was not so common to have a computer at home) and,
with agreement from the school, I was able to submit at least some of
my work typed on the BBC B and printed out. These days I very rarely
write anything beyond greetings cards by hand :)