---
date: 2015-03-22
round: Round 12
title: When Instructor Pride and Ego Inhibits Learning
author: Phil Rosenfield
permalink: /2015/03/phil-rosenfield-motivation/
tags:
  - Motivation
---
The quarter I was to take a class in my PhD program, the professor who
had designed and taught it became the chair of the department. Her
replacement instructor attempted to exactly follow her course notes.
It was soon clear that he was in over his head, though he never would
admit it nor change anything about his approach (besides disseminating
her notes to the class). After the first week, lectures became more
and more incomprehensible as he struggled to convey the subtleties of
the material and his inherited notes. Early assignments went ungraded
and unreturned long after midterm exams occurred, I remember getting
more than half of my course work returned with unintelligible marks
two weeks after the final exam.

Despite accepting that I was never going to get feedback on my
coursework, I still completed every assignment (they were the same
assignments the chair of the department would've assigned).  I became
demotivated when I learned that I was given a lower grade the one of
my peers who had become demotivated earlier on; she never finished any
assignment after realizing the instructor wasn't actually grading
them. At the time, I felt either the work I submitted was worth less
than not doing it, or there was some other rubric that we were graded
on.  (There was simply no way of quantitatively assessing our grades
before they were submitted to the university). However, in that
graduate program, grades didn't matter as long as they were above a
certain threshold, and my grade was above the threshold (but the
lowest I received in the program).

I think back to that class a lot. Upon reflection, it seems I happened
to be penalized for the instructor's lack of preparation mixed with
heavy amounts of ego and pride.  However, there are positive
take-aways from the experience, I make efforts to ensure I'm open to
continual assessment and adaptation, in and out of the classroom (I
say something like "I have no intension of sucking" when I ask for
student feedback). I also saw first hand that hiding that you do not
know something or admitting that you are in over your head is far more
personally and professionally damaging than the other way around. Had
he enlisted our help, flipped the classroom, said something like
"let's master this material together," he probably would still be
teaching that course today.

I think the fairest way to fix the issue after the fact would've been
to give students credit for the course instead of a letter grade.
