---
title: University of Hawaii Recap
author: Erik Bray
permalink: /2012/12/university-of-hawaii-recap/
categories:
  - Reports
  - Teaching
---
Last week Fernando Pérez and I taught a Software Carpentry bootcamp at the University of Hawaii in Manoa.  The audience was mostly from Bioinformatics and Oceanography with a few from Astronomy and some other disciplines. In some ways it was a difficult group to teach due to the wide range of disciplines, stages in the students&#8217; educations, and levels of programming experience.  On the other hand everybody there seemed very engaged and motivated, so despite the diversity (or in some ways because of it) it was a great group to work with and I think we all (Fernando and I included) learned a lot.

Stepping back a bit, I&#8217;d just like to thank Megan Donahue and Matt Iacchei who did all the work to bring us over and make this whole thing happen.  They were amazing hosts and did everything possible to make our lives easy, including (but not limited to) making sure the class was well stocked with power supplies and snacks (and coffee!), and all the work of helping us make our travel arrangements.  Matt, sadly, fell ill the day before the bootcamp and was unable to attend after all the work he put into making it happen.

## Always have a backup to GitHub ready

All in all things went pretty swimmingly from my perspective, except at the very beginning.  Some of you may remember the massive GitHub outage that occurred last Friday. This struck just as I was starting to teach bash, and wanted everyone to download the same sample files for working with&#8230;which were on GitHub.  In a testament to the usefulness of git, Fernando was able to just push the repository to Bitbucket instead so that everyone could get it from there.  Unfortunately, he didn&#8217;t realize that I had pushed some important new material to the repository since his last pull, so what everyone got from Bitbucket was still out of date.  I should have done the push instead, but neither of us could have anticipated that.  All in all I think just getting those files out to everyone cost us close to an hour.  Part of the problem with that was also teaching everyone how to use wget and/or curl and/or git to obtain the files. With the wide diversities of systems in the class this was a surprising amount of effort.

I do think it&#8217;s useful, for the purposes of teaching bash and moving files around to have some common set of files for everyone to work with.  For example, Katy Huff developed a [set of examples][1] many of us have used based on experimental data from a cochlear implant study.  I used that example myself at GMU in October, and while I have nothing against it I decided this time around to develop my own example, based on real life data of mine.  That way I just knew the material better and could teach around it without relying on any notes.

In either case, since this is the very first topic we teach, I should make a point of making sure as many people have that data in their home directories before they even come in.  Sure, not everybody will follow the instructions, but the more that do the more quickly we can get started.  So if we&#8217;re going to want to distribute sample data we should provide instructions, along with the installation instructions, for how people can obtain the data.  I did also bring a USB drive with the data on it, but one USB drive is not enough for a class of ~40 people.

## Other disappointments

After that one (admittedly large) hiccup, it was mostly smooth sailing.  I only have three major regrets beside that:

1.  I really wanted to try out Titus Brown&#8217;s [recommendation][2] of using minute cards for getting real time feedback around which to shape the discussion.  Unfortunately my pack of index cards was destroyed in a kayaking incident about which we shall say no more, and I never had an opportunity to pick up a new pack. I&#8217;ll have to try it next time. Alternatively I could have used something like Etherpad or some other discussion room to implement this, but I didn&#8217;t have enough time to think it through.
2.  After the GitHub fiasco I had to rush things a bit on the shell, and had to skip two topics that I really wanted to get to: Setting the $EDITOR environment variable, and generating SSH keys.  Both of these were in my notes in anticipation of teaching git the next day.  We didn&#8217;t get to do SSH keys at all, which ended up being an annoyance for everyone when we started doing pushing to GitHub (more on that below).  And without setting $EDITOR, a lot of people got stuck in vim&#8211;to my surprise Git Bash for Windows even comes with vim as the default editor.  Regardless, for future bootcamps I want to slip in a short module specifically on vi/vim, what it looks like, and how to get out of it (and how to set $EDITOR so that you never see it again if you don&#8217;t want to&#8211;I love vim myself but I wouldn&#8217;t wish it on anyone who isn&#8217;t actively seeking it out).
3.  We really need to develop a good unit on file parsing.  As soon as Fernando introduced how to open text files and read them with Python we got absolutely bombarded with questions of &#8220;Well how would I read this sort of file&#8221; or &#8220;What if I have this custom formatted file&#8211;how would I parse it&#8221; etc.  Some of these questions were satisfied when I later showed np.genfromtxt(). But I think some people were still disappointed that we couldn&#8217;t directly address their questions.  I think it was Matt who suggested to me the idea of getting a few samples from students of files that they need to parse, and take one or two of the simpler examples and show exactly how to do it. Something like that would certainly be a start. People with more difficult problems can discuss them one on one later.

## Teaching git

This was the second time I&#8217;ve helped teach git, and it went a \*lot\* better than the first time, despite having nearly 8 times as many people. I guess it just helped to have a better idea what to expect.  I had cobbled together some git materials based on my own edits to what was already in some of the other SWC repos. But Fernando found it muddled and unhelpful, and he was right about that.  So we started working from a tutorial he liked called, appropriately, [Git for Scientists][3].  I still have a few problems with it, but it&#8217;s a far cry better than what I had.  We need to keep developing our own git material, but whatever we do needs to have a lot of pictures, I think.

We followed Git for Scientists for teaching using git locally.  I&#8217;ve sort of had the feeling that I don&#8217;t like the idea of teaching how to use git &#8220;locally&#8221; at first. Rather, I prefer jumping right into cloning a repo from GitHub and pushing/pulling collaboratively.  The theory is that that&#8217;s the part where things get fun, and it gets people engaged early on.  And indeed what I&#8217;ve observed is that once people figure out how to push changes to each other&#8217;s files and use git blame and such they start to really have fun with it.  But I think it&#8217;s a little harder to teach this way with git, just because pushing changes to a git repository successfully involves a lot more steps than doing the same with SVN.  So I think it does make sense, ultimately, to get people comfortable with the &#8220;git add; git commit&#8221; workflow before moving on to push/pull.

In the end though I did manage to get everyone to push changes to a repository hosted on GitHub, which was sort of my goal.  The biggest problem we had came about because few people had SSH keys configured. When they would go to push, in the time it took them to enter their username and password someone else would push, causing their push to fail due to being behind the remote master&#8217;s repository by 1 or 2 commits.  I did, fortunately, anticipate this scenario (after learning the hard way at GMU) and people seemed to understand and accept what was going on.  They also seemed to accept my explanation that it&#8217;s not particularly *normal* to have 40 people trying to push new files to a remote repository *simultaneously*.  It worked pretty well, and in my opinion that was one of the most fun parts of the workshop.

One student did bring up the point afterwards that they would have preferred if we teach git earlier on, perhaps after teaching the shell. That&#8217;s something we&#8217;ll have to have a discussion about.  I believe Greg has explained to me before (and please correct me if I&#8217;m misrepresenting you), that it&#8217;s better to drag people through the mud a bit first without version control so that the need for it becomes more apparent to them once you do finally teach it, after spending a day or so alluding to it. Or something like that.  And I think there&#8217;s something to be said for that.  I don&#8217;t know what more to say about that right now&#8211;food for thought.

 [1]: https://github.com/thehackerwithin/UofCSCBC2012/tree/master/1-Shell
 [2]: http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2012-scripps-swc-postmortem.html
 [3]: http://nyuccl.org/pages/GitTutorial/
