---
title: 'Demotivation: Physical Chemistry'
author: Lauren Michael
layout: post
permalink: /2014/10/demotivation-physical-chemistry/
categories:
  - Motivation
---
After my first year of college, pursuing two majors (Biology and Chemistry), I was dreading the new school year, where I would be joining Chemistry juniors (as only a second-year student, myself) for the particularly-difficult courses in Physical Chemistry (I and II). In case you&#8217;re less familiar, Physical Chemistry is regularly regarded as one of the hardest college topics/courses, but I was pretty sure I could handle the material. 

What I dreaded was that the professor for Physical Chemistry was known to be a more than terrible teacher. He was a perfectly nice, old man whom everyone loved as a person, but he had been the only faculty member interested in teaching Physical Chemistry, for decades, and what that really meant was that he didn&#8217;t really *teach* the material anymore. In the first two weeks of Physical Chemistry I, he smiled politely through 20-year-old transparency sheets that had some basic Calculus (somewhat relevant) and other non-relevant simple math, but he didn&#8217;t connect any of this to the Physical Chemistry concepts in the textbook. Furthermore, this professor&#8217;s difficult weekly quizzes and unit exams were known to be on a 3-year rotating schedule, so most students had learned to make friends with older students who passed down years of graded quizzes and exams. As a result, Chemistry majors dreaded the Physical Chemistry courses and topic (which is already hard enough!), and assumed they wouldn&#8217;t actually learn much, but they had at least figured out how to get decent grades.

I, on the other hand, was in a weird position. As the only second-year (&#8220;sophomore&#8221;) student in a junior-level course, my classmates were a bit wary of me, and I hadn&#8217;t yet made many friends with people in the Chemistry major. As a result, I had none of the advantages of passed-down quiz/exam materials or the clique-like study groups the rest of the class formed, because they&#8217;d known each other longer. During the first quiz (two weeks in), I was sincerely fighting back tears. While I had read and studied hard, tried to discuss with classmates, and completed all of the indicated problems, the questions on the quiz were intentionally tricky and mostly un-tied to the chapter material or in-class topics. I discussed this with a classmate right after the quiz, who indicated that she and everyone else had been expecting an oddly constructed quiz; unfortunately, the severity of the course lecture and assessment situation was just sinking in for me.

By that afternoon, I had dropped the class and changed my Chemistry major to a minor. In my mind, I had already worked so hard the year before, and now I felt the odds were stacked too highly against me &#8211; not just for *passing* Physical Chemistry, but for completing the Chemistry major, and certainly for any hope of actually learning the material. I had actually found the book material interesting, but thought that I might just not be cut out for what&#8217;s expected of Chemistry majors at my school, especially if that meant essentially cheating by memorizing old quizzes and exams, without actually learning. The professor did find me a week later to give back my graded quiz, which just confirmed that I had utterly failed it. 

**Here&#8217;s where something WAS done that rectified my demotivated situation:** I learned later in the school year that another professor had stepped up to teach Physical Chemistry for the next school year. By the following fall semester, I had rejoined the Chemistry major and enrolled again in Physical Chemistry I with the new instructor, and I had made friends with others in the class. The new instructor didn&#8217;t really make things *easier*: he suggested even more homework problems, and created more numerous and difficult assessments. BUT, he actually taught the material very well and sincerely cared about our understanding of it. As a class, we set records for our performance on the national standardized exams for Physical Chemistry, and I worked my butt off for an excellent grade and understanding of the material. The department had been trying to address the &#8220;Physical Chemistry situation&#8221; for years.

Here are some things I think could have been done prior/in addition to the actual fix:  
&#8211; The instructor could have been switched out at a sooner time  
&#8211; Other faculty could have sat in on lectures and made recommendations for lecture improvements  
&#8211; The department could have made the instructor produce new quizzes and exams  
&#8211; The department could have provided additional support (outside of class) for students taking Physical Chemistry  
&#8211; I could have made more of an effort to connect with Chemistry major students prior to the course (not ideal as a stand-alone fix, but would have helped).  
&#8211; I always thought I might have just done better by waiting to take the course until the following year,even with the existing instructor, since I was actually taking it a year ahead of schedule in my first attempt. More time for mental preparation, awareness of the challenges, and in-class social connections were what the other students had over me when I tried taking the course the first time.